DB1 Project 1-Phase 1 Summer 2024
In this project, you will create a conceptual schema database design using the ER/EER model, then convert it to a
relational (tabular) schema using the rules for ER/EER-to-relational (tabular) mapping. (In project 1-part 2, you will
load data into the relational database and do queries in SQL, as well as program a Web interface to enter query
parameters and display query results.)
The database that you will design in project 1 will keep track of the doctoral (PhD) students in the CSE department,
their supervising professors, their means of support, the milestones they complete, among other information. Here are
the requirements for the database:

1. We want to store and query information for the DOCTORAL database for the doctoral (PhD) students at UTA.
Each PHD_STUDENT has a StudentId, Name (made up of the components FName, LName), StartSemester
(semester when the student started is made up of two components (Semester, Year))

2. The DOCTORAL database will store information on each CSE Department INSTRUCTOR and each research
GRANT, as well as each doctoral MILESTONE. It will also include information about each COURSE and
SECTION offered by the CSE department.

3. For each INSTRUCTOR, we shall keep track of the InstructorId (unique), Name (made up of (FName, LName),
StartDate (when they started at the university), Degree (their highest degree achieved), and Rank (the title of the
INSTRUCTOR –Prof, Asst Prof, Lecturer, etc.). INSTRUCTORs are of two main types: ADJUNCT and
FULL_TIME, and the full-time instructors can be either TT (tenure track) or NTT (non-tenure track). For the TT
instructors, the database should keep track of NoOfPhDSupervised (the total number of PhD students the instructor
has supervised so far). The NTT instructors should be related to the COURSEs they have taught as coursestaught.

4. For each SECTION, we shall keep track of SectionId and Capacity. Each COURSE will be related to the course
sections being offered.

5. PHD_STUDENT has several main types based on the financial support he or she receives–GRA (graduate research
assistant), GTA (graduate teaching assistant), SCHOLARSHIP_SUPPORT(supported by a government scholarship
or some other kind of scholarship), SELF_SUPPORT (student supports their own studies –e.g. part-time PhD
students who have a job or support their study by a loan or using their own means). For students on self-support, it's
recorded if students pay their tuition in full or opt for installment plans.

6. For students who work as GRA (Graduate Research Assistant), we want to store their major research areas i.e
Artificial Intelligence, Cybersecurity, or Software Engineering. Additionally, students in the GTA (Graduate Teaching
Assistant) position can also work in other departments besides CSE.

7. The database shall keep information about each GRANT (research or educational grant), which has a GrantTitle,
AccountNo (the grant Id), Source (the funding agency or company name providing the grant), Type (the type of grant
-research, educational, gift, contract, other), StartDate, EndDate, StartAmount, and CurrBalance.

8. The database will keep track of the current source of funding for each PhD student. For GRA, this will be the
GRANT, the student's funding and the monthly pay. Many GRAs can be funded by one GRANT. Each GRANT has
one or more TT faculty associated with it, either as a pi (Principal Investigator) or as co-pi.

9. For GTA the source of funding will be the current SECTION (of a course) they are assigned to and the monthly
pay. For SCHOLARSHIP_SUPPORT students the funding will be the SCHOLARSHIP they are getting. We shall
keep track of the ScholarshipId, type of scholarship and the funding source (organization and country) for every
SCHOLARSHIP.

10. Each PHD_STUDENT must pass several MILESTONEs to reach their degree. Each MILESTONE has a Mid
and MName. When a student passes a milestone the date when the student passed is recorded.

11. Each PHD_STUDENT must have a PhD supervisor who must be a TT faculty, plus several additional TT faculty
on the supervisory committee of the student.




Important Notes:
(1) Individually or Pair Up: This project can be done individually, or in a pair (a two - student group). If students do it
in a pair, both students will receive the same grade.
(2) Plagiarism Policy: Copying from other students or groups is not permitted and will result in a grade of zero for the
entire project.
(3) EER Notation: The preferred conceptual design is to draw the ER/EER diagram in the ER/EER notation that we
covered in the book.
(4) Relational Schema Notation: When you convert/map your conceptual design to relations/tables, include a
relational schema diagram using the notation used in the textbook. Specify every primary key and referential integrity
constraint.
(5) Diagrams Submission: You can draw your ER/EER diagram by hand (neatly) and scan it to an image file or use a
drawing tool to create a computer image file or use any available database conceptual design tool.
(6) Assumptions Documentation: Include a text (word) file explaining briefly your design choices as to how you chose
the entity types, attributes, relationships, and any subtypes/subclasses.
(7) Honor Code: Each student is required to submit the honor code. (Honor code given below). Failing to do so will
cost 20 points.
(8) Rubric: Follow the rubric given for each deliverable to get maximum marks. ‘
(9) Submission Instructions: Zip all files and submit the zipped folder. If you are doing the project in a pair, only one
team member should submit the zip folder.
(10) Late policy: Any submission after the due date will be penalized by - 5% out of 100 for each day late.
Due Date: July 20th, 2024 by 11:59 pm.



Deliverables:
1. EER Diagram
2. Relational Schema
3. Word Document
4. Honor Code



Rubrics: Make sure your submission follows the marking points mentioned below for each deliverable.
1. EER Diagram: + 60 points
• All entity types (including weak entity – if any)
• All attributes
• Primary key
• All relations
• Relational attributes (if any)
• Accurate cardinality ratios
• Accurate total or partial participation presentation
• Generalization and/or specialization presentation
• Follow the naming convention of entities, attributes, and relations according to the given description.
• Follow proper representation of EER notations.
• If you are submitting a hand drawn diagram, make sure it is neat enough and readable, and scan it with
good resolution.


2. Relational Schema: + 30 points
• All tables
• All attributes
• Correct primary and foreign keys
• Correct direction of arrows
• If arrows are overlapping due to space congestion use line bump or use proper spacing.
• Entities, attributes, and relations of relational schema should match with EER diagram.


3. Word Document: +10 points
• State all your assumptions in the word document.
• Briefly explain your design choices for entities, relations, attributes, etc.
4. Honor Code:
• All students must include and sign the honor code on the first page of each assignment. Failing to do so
will cost you 20 points.
• Use the honor code below:
HONOR CODE
I pledge, on my honor, to uphold UT Arlington's tradition of academic integrity, a tradition that values
hard work and honest effort in the pursuit of academic excellence.
I promise that I will submit only work that I personally create or that I contribute to group
collaborations, and I will appropriately reference any work from other sources. I will follow the
highest standards of integrity and uphold the spirit of the Honor Code.
